Citation Nr: 18100017
Decision Date: 	Archive Date: 03/28/18

DOCKET NO. 14-28 521
DATE:	
ISSUES DECIDED:	1	ISSUES REMANDED:	1
 
ORDER
New and material evidence having been received, the claim for service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is reopened, and to this extent only, the appeal is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
1.  An October 2008 rating decision denied the Veteran’s claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD; the Veteran did not appeal that decision in a timely manner and no new and material evidence was submitted within one year of the rating decision.
2.  Evidence received since the October 2008 rating decision is not cumulative or redundant of the evidence previously of record and relates to unestablished facts necessary to substantiate the claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
1.  The October 2008 rating decision that denied service connection for PTSD is final.  38 U.S.C. § 7104 (2002); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 20.302, 20.1103 (2008).
2.  New and material evidence has been received to reopen the claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (2017).
REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
The Veteran served on active duty from October 1967 to October 1971, to include service in the Republic of Korea.  
The Veteran testified at a videoconference hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in November 2016.  A transcript of the hearing is of record.   
 
Whether new and material evidence has been received to reopen the claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD.
The Veteran’s initial claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD was denied in an October 2008 rating decision. 
Generally, if a claim of entitlement to service connection has been previously denied and that decision became final, the claim can be reopened and reconsidered only if new and material evidence is presented with respect to that claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5108. 
New evidence is defined as existing evidence not previously submitted to agency decision makers.  Material evidence means evidence that, by itself or when considered with previous evidence of record, relates to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim.  New and material evidence can be neither cumulative nor redundant of the evidence previously of record, and must raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(a).  The threshold to reopen the claim is low.  See Shade v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 110, 118 (2010).
For the purpose of establishing whether new and material evidence has been received, the credibility of the evidence is generally presumed.  Justus v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 510, 513 (1992). 
The RO denied the Veteran’s claim for service connection for PTSD in an October 2008 rating decision, finding insufficient evidence to establish both a diagnosis of PTSD and that the disability was related to the Veteran’s asserted in-service stressors.  The Veteran was provided notice of this decision and his appellate rights that same month.  The Veteran did not appeal the October 2008 decision or submit material evidence within one year of the notification of the decision.  Therefore, the decision is final.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7104 (2002); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 20.302, 20.1103 (2008).  
The Board finds that the evidence received since the October 2008 rating decision includes evidence that is both new and material to the claims.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156.  Specifically, this evidence includes VA treatment records indicating a history of PTSD diagnosed by VA providers and the Veteran’s November 2016 hearing testimony.  In addition, the Veteran’s VA Form 9 substantive appeal contains information pertaining to the establishment of an in-service stressor. The new evidence raises a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim as it addresses both a diagnosis of PTSD for service connection purposes and that the disability is related to an in-service stressor, and therefore addresses reasons for the previous denial.  Such evidence is presumed credible solely for the purpose of determining whether new and material evidence has been submitted.  See Justus, 3 Vet. App. at 513. 
Accordingly, the claim for service connection for PTSD is reopened and will be considered on the merits.  
In evaluating the evidence and rendering a decision on the merits, the Board is required to assess the credibility and probative value of proffered evidence in the context of the record as a whole, and the Justus presumption of credibility no longer attaches.  See Madden v. Gober, 125 F.3d 1477, 1481 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  Thus, evidence that is sufficient to reopen a claim may not be sufficient to grant the benefit being sought.  See generally Hodge v. West, 155 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 1998).  As explained in the remand section below, the Board has determined that additional development is necessary before the merits of the Veteran’s claim for service connection for PTSD can be addressed.
REMANDED ISSUE
While the Board regrets additional delay, the Veteran’s claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD must be remanded for additional development.
 
The matter is REMANDED for the following action:
1.  Ask the Veteran to identify any remaining outstanding treatment records relevant to his claim.  All identified VA records should be added to the claims file, to include records from the Tyler Texas VA Medical Center (VAMC).  The Veteran has asserted that he was first diagnosed with PTSD in 2008 at the Tyler Texas VAMC.  These records are not in the Veteran’s claims file.  If these records are missing, or are otherwise unavailable, this fact should be documented and a formal finding of unavailability should be made with notice to the Veteran and his representative.  
All other properly identified treatment records, to include private treatment records, should be obtained if the necessary authorization is provided by the Veteran.  If any records are not available, or the Veteran identifies sources of treatment but does not provide authorization to obtain records, appropriate action should be taken (see 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)-(e)), to include notifying the Veteran of the unavailability of the records.
2.  Obtain and associate with the claims file the Veteran's complete military personnel records, to include any records or reports involving the Veteran from Forbes Air Force Base in Topeka, Kansas.  The Veteran has asserted that an in-service stressor pertaining to his claim was reported in writing to supervisors in September 1971.  See July 2014 VA Form 9.  All efforts to obtain records should be associated with the claims file.  If any records are missing or are otherwise unavailable, this fact should be documented and a formal finding of unavailability should be made with notice to the Veteran and his representative.
3.  After the above has been accomplished, the AOJ should consider whether additional stressor verification is necessary in light of any evidence received.  All developmental action should be documented in the claims file for the Board’s review.







(CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE)   
4.  After completing the above actions, the AOJ should readjudicate the claim on appeal.  If the benefit sought on appeal remains denied, a supplemental statement of the case must be provided to the Veteran and his representative.  After the Veteran has had an adequate opportunity to respond, the appeal must be returned to the Board for further appellate review.
 
 
Nathan Kroes
Veterans Law Judge
Board of Veterans’ Appeals
ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD	Robert N. Scarduzio 
 Department of Veterans Affairs

YOUR RIGHTS TO APPEAL OUR DECISION

The attached decision by the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) is the final decision for all issues addressed in the "Order" section of the decision.  The Board may also choose to remand an issue or issues to the local VA office for additional development.   If the Board did this in your case, then a "Remand" section follows the "Order."  However, you cannot appeal an issue remanded to the local VA office because a remand is not a final decision.  The advice below on how to appeal a claim applies only to issues that were allowed, denied, or dismissed in the “Order.”

If you are satisfied with the outcome of your appeal, you do not need to do anything.  Your local VA office will implement the Board’s decision.  However, if you are not satisfied with the Board's decision on any or all of the issues allowed, denied, or dismissed, you have the following options, which are listed in no particular order of importance: 

•	Appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court)
•	File with the Board a motion for reconsideration of this decision
•	File with the Board a motion to vacate this decision 
•	File with the Board a motion for revision of this decision based on clear and unmistakable error. 

Although it would not affect this BVA decision, you may choose to also: 

•	Reopen your claim at the local VA office by submitting new and material evidence. 

There is no time limit for filing a motion for reconsideration, a motion to vacate, or a motion for revision based on clear and unmistakable error with the Board, or a claim to reopen at the local VA office.  Please note that if you file a Notice of Appeal with the Court and a motion with the Board at the same time, this may delay your appeal at the Court because of jurisdictional conflicts.  If you file a Notice of Appeal with the Court before you file a motion with the Board, the Board will not be able to consider your motion without the Court's permission or until your appeal at the Court is resolved. 

How long do I have to start my appeal to the court? You have 120 days from the date this decision was mailed to you (as shown on the first page of this decision) to file a Notice of Appeal with the Court.  If you also want to file a motion for reconsideration or a motion to vacate, you will still have time to appeal to the court.  As long as you file your motion(s) with the Board within 120 days of the date this decision was mailed to you, you will have another 120 days from the date the Board decides the motion for reconsideration or the motion to vacate to appeal to the Court.  You should know that even if you have a representative, as discussed below, it is your responsibility to make sure that your appeal to the Court is filed on time.  Please note that the 120-day time limit to file a Notice of Appeal with the Court does not include a period of active duty.  If your active military service materially affects your ability to file a Notice of Appeal (e.g., due to a combat deployment), you may also be entitled to an additional 90 days after active duty service terminates before the 120-day appeal period (or remainder of the appeal period) begins to run. 

How do I appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims?  Send your Notice of Appeal to the Court at:

Clerk, U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims
625 Indiana Avenue, NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20004-2950

You can get information about the Notice of Appeal, the procedure for filing a Notice of Appeal, the filing fee (or a motion to waive the filing fee if payment would cause financial hardship), and other matters covered by the Court's rules directly from the Court.  You can also get this information from the Court's website on the Internet at: http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov, and you can download forms directly from that website.  The Court's facsimile number is (202) 501-5848. 

To ensure full protection of your right of appeal to the Court, you must file your Notice of Appeal with the Court, not with the Board, or any other VA office. 

How do I file a motion for reconsideration? You can file a motion asking the Board to reconsider any part of this decision by writing a letter to the Board clearly explaining why you believe that the Board committed an obvious error of fact or law, or stating that new and material military service records have been discovered that apply to your appeal.  It is important that your letter be as specific as possible.  A general statement of dissatisfaction with the Board decision or some other aspect of the VA claims adjudication process will not suffice.  If the Board has decided more than one issue, be sure to tell us which issue(s) you want reconsidered.  Issues not clearly identified will not be considered.  Send your letter to: 

Litigation Support Branch
Board of Veterans' Appeals
P.O. Box 27063
Washington, DC 20038

VA FORM
DEC 2016	 4597	Page 1	CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

 
Remember, the Board places no time limit on filing a motion for reconsideration, and you can do this at any time.  However, if you also plan to appeal this decision to the Court, you must file your motion within 120 days from the date of this decision. 

How do I file a motion to vacate?  You can file a motion asking the Board to vacate any part of this decision by writing a letter to the Board stating why you believe you were denied due process of law during your appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. 20.904.  For example, you were denied your right to representation through action or inaction by VA personnel, you were not provided a Statement of the Case or Supplemental Statement of the Case, or you did not get a personal hearing that you requested.  You can also file a motion to vacate any part of this decision on the basis that the Board allowed benefits based on false or fraudulent evidence.  Send this motion to the address on the previous page for the Litigation Support Branch, at the Board.  Remember, the Board places no time limit on filing a motion to vacate, and you can do this at any time.  However, if you also plan to appeal this decision to the Court, you must file your motion within 120 days from the date of this decision. 

How do I file a motion to revise the Board's decision on the basis of clear and unmistakable error?  You can file a motion asking that the Board revise this decision if you believe that the decision is based on "clear and unmistakable error" (CUE).  Send this motion to the address on the previous page for the Litigation Support Branch, at the Board.  You should be careful when preparing such a motion because it must meet specific requirements, and the Board will not review a final decision on this basis more than once.  You should carefully review the Board's Rules of Practice on CUE, 38 C.F.R. 20.1400-20.1411, and seek help from a qualified representative before filing such a motion.  See discussion on representation below.  Remember, the Board places no time limit on filing a CUE review motion, and you can do this at any time. 

How do I reopen my claim?  You can ask your local VA office to reopen your claim by simply sending them a statement indicating that you want to reopen your claim.  However, to be successful in reopening your claim, you must submit new and material evidence to that office.  See 38 C.F.R. 3.156(a). 

Can someone represent me in my appeal?  Yes.  You can always represent yourself in any claim before VA, including the Board, but you can also appoint someone to represent you.  An accredited representative of a recognized service organization may represent you free of charge.  VA approves these organizations to help veterans, service members, and dependents prepare their claims and present them to VA.  An accredited representative works for the service organization and knows how to prepare and present claims.  You can find a listing of these organizations on the Internet at: http://www.va.gov/vso/.  You can also choose to be represented by a private attorney or by an "agent."  (An agent is a person who is not a lawyer, but is specially accredited by VA.) 

If you want someone to represent you before the Court, rather than before the VA, you can get information on how to do so at the Court’s website at: http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov.  The Court’s website provides a state-by-state listing of persons admitted to practice before the Court who have indicated their availability to the represent appellants.  You may also request this information by writing directly to the Court.  Information about free representation through the Veterans Consortium Pro Bono Program is also available at the Court’s website, or at: http://www.vetsprobono.org, mail@vetsprobono.org, or (855) 446-9678.

Do I have to pay an attorney or agent to represent me?  An attorney or agent may charge a fee to represent you after a notice of disagreement has been filed with respect to your case, provided that the notice of disagreement was filed on or after June 20, 2007.  See 38 U.S.C. 5904; 38 C.F.R. 14.636.  If the notice of disagreement was filed before June 20, 2007, an attorney or accredited agent may charge fees for services, but only after the Board first issues a final decision in the case, and only if the agent or attorney is hired within one year of the Board’s decision.  See 38 C.F.R. 14.636(c)(2). 

The notice of disagreement limitation does not apply to fees charged, allowed, or paid for services provided with respect to proceedings before a court.  VA cannot pay the fees of your attorney or agent, with the exception of payment of fees out of past-due benefits awarded to you on the basis of your claim when provided for in a fee agreement. 

Fee for VA home and small business loan cases:  An attorney or agent may charge you a reasonable fee for services involving a VA home loan or small business loan.  See 38 U.S.C. 5904; 38 C.F.R. 14.636(d). 

Filing of Fee Agreements:  If you hire an attorney or agent to represent you, a copy of any fee agreement must be sent to VA. The fee agreement must clearly specify if VA is to pay the attorney or agent directly out of past-due benefits. See 38 C.F.R. 14.636(g)(2). If  the fee agreement provides for the direct payment of fees out of past-due benefits, a copy of the direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the agency of original jurisdiction within 30 days of its execution. A copy of any fee agreement that is not a direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the Office of the General Counsel within 30 days of its execution by mailing the copy to the following address: Office of the General Counsel (022D), Department of Veterans Affairs, 810 Vermont Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20420. See 38 C.F.R. 14.636(g)(3).

The Office of the General Counsel may decide, on its own, to review a fee agreement or expenses charged by your agent or attorney for reasonableness. You can also file a motion requesting such review to the address above for the Office of the General Counsel. See
38 C.F.R. 14.636(i); 14.637(d).



VA FORM
DEC 2016 	 4597	Page 2	SUPERSEDES VA FORM 4597, APR 2015, 
  WHICH WILL NOT BE USED



